[eks] Add notes about extended support (#3675)
captn3m0/endoflife.date: products/eks.md

-   releaseCycle: "1.28"
    releaseDate: 2023-09-26

>     eol: 2024-11-01
>     extendedSupport: 2025-11-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2024-10-28 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2025-10-28 # estimated
```

    latest: '1.28-eks-2'
    latestReleaseDate: 2023-10-16

-   releaseCycle: "1.27"
    releaseDate: 2023-05-24

>     eol: 2024-07-01
>     extendedSupport: 2025-07-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2024-06-28 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2025-06-28 # estimated
```

    latest: '1.27-eks-6'
    latestReleaseDate: 2023-10-16

-   releaseCycle: "1.26"
    releaseDate: 2023-04-11

>     eol: 2024-06-01
>     extendedSupport: 2025-06-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2024-02-28 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2025-02-28 # estimated
```

    latest: '1.26-eks-7'
    latestReleaseDate: 2023-10-16

-   releaseCycle: "1.25"
    releaseDate: 2023-02-21

>     eol: 2024-05-01
>     extendedSupport: 2025-05-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2023-10-27 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2024-10-27 # estimated
```

    latest: '1.25-eks-8'
    latestReleaseDate: 2023-10-16

-   releaseCycle: "1.24"
    releaseDate: 2022-11-15

>     eol: 2024-01-31
>     extendedSupport: 2025-01-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2023-07-28 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2024-07-28 # estimated
```

    latest: '1.24-eks-11'
    latestReleaseDate: 2023-10-16

-   releaseCycle: "1.23"
    releaseDate: 2022-08-11

>     eol: 2023-10-11
>     extendedSupport: 2024-10-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    eol: 2023-02-28 # corresponding Kubernetes EOL date
    extendedSupport: 2024-02-28 # estimated
```

time. Standard support is provided by Amazon for as long as the upstream Kubernetes release is supported (14 months 
from the Kubernetes GA date). Following the standard support period, Amazon provides extended support for up to 12 months.

You can subscribe to upgrade notices on your [Personal Health Dashboard](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/technology/personal-health-dashboard/). The notice includes the end of support date, which is at least 60 days from the date of the notice.

Starting from version 1.23, Amazon EKS clusters running on EOL version will automatically enter extended support at the end of the of standard support and Amazon will apply an additional charge per cluster hour for all those clusters.
Users that don’t want to be [automatically enrolled in extended support](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/kubernetes-versions.html#extended-support-faqs) must upgrade their cluster before the end of the standard support phase.

## Upgrading

Amazon EKS will automatically upgrade existing control planes (not nodes) to the oldest supported
version through a gradual deployment process after the end of extended support date. After the

> automatic control plane update, , users _must [manually update their cluster add-ons and Amazon EC2 nodes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html#update-existing-cluster)_.

Author: ```suggestion
automatic control plane update, users _must [manually update their cluster add-ons and Amazon EC2 nodes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html#update-existing-cluster)_.
```

> conformant for a predictable experience.

Amazon EKS guarantees support for at least four production-ready versions of Kubernetes at any given
time. A Kubernetes version is fully supported on EKS for 14 months as standard support and for up to
26 months as exteneded support after first being available on Amazon EKS. This is true even if
upstream Kubernetes is no longer supporting a version available on Amazon EKS.

You can subscribe to upgrade notices (sent approximately 12 months after the Kubernetes version was
released on Amazon EKS) on your [Personal Health Dashboard](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/technology/personal-health-dashboard/).
The notice includes the end of support date, which is at least 60 days from the date of the notice.

## Upgrading

> At the end of the of standard support for a Kubernetes version, Amazon EKS clusters running on EOL

Reviewer: It's only a preview for now according to https://aws.amazon.com/jp/blogs/containers/amazon-eks-extended-support-for-kubernetes-versions-available-in-preview/.

I think this should also be documented with a link to this article, notably:

- What does "preview" mean ?
- When did it start ?
- For which minimal Kubernetes version ?

Author: Kubernetes v1.23 is the oldest version that is currently supported by AWS and the oldest version that has received extended support.

I think we can assume that all Kubernetes clusters below v1.23 have already been automatically upgraded to v1.23, so noting the minimum Kubernetes version is only of historical interest when the process has changed.

Is endoflife.date also supposed to document the historical process (not applicable to any clusters anymore), or only the current process?

Reviewer: > Is endoflife.date also supposed to document the historical process (not applicable to any clusters anymore), or only the current process?

Mostly the current process, but during a period of transition I think it's best to explain a little bit more. And same as above, considering this will be a paid option I would find odd that you can't opt-out of it.

version will automatically enter extended support and Amazon apply an additional charge per cluster

> hour for all clusters running an extended support version. 

Reviewer: This paragraph is not about upgrading, so I think it should be moved after the first paragraph.

Author: Moved around.

Amazon EKS will automatically upgrade existing control planes (not nodes) to the oldest supported
version through a gradual deployment process after the end of extended support date. After the

> automatic control plane update, you _must [manually update cluster add-ons and Amazon EC2 nodes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html#update-existing-cluster)_.

Reviewer: This is too focused on extended support. From what I understand this is true for both level of support so, I think it would be best to change `after the end of extended support date` to `after the end of support date, whether standard or extended`. WDYT ?

Author: If I understand the new process correctly, all standard support users are automatically migrated to extended support (instead of automatic upgrades), then extended support users can be automatically upgraded. I think AWS has no way for available AWS EKS releases to force update the cluster without the extended support phase.

Reviewer: I don't know, but considering this will be a paid option I would find odd that you can't opt-out of it.

> During the preview, there is no additional cost to run a cluster with extended support. When extended support is generally available in early 2024, there will be an additional charge per cluster hour for all clusters running an extended support version. Alternatively, you can upgrade the cluster at any time to a standard support version, which remain on the existing [Amazon EKS Pricing](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/pricing/).

@endoflife-date/everyone, is there anyone knowing Amazon EKS that could help here ?

Author: > With extended support, Amazon EKS clusters will keep running on a version for up to 12 months after the 14-month initial support period. At the end of the 14 months of standard support for a Kubernetes version, clusters running on that version will automatically enter extended support. **There’s no action or configuration changes required.** At the end of the extended support period, any clusters using the deprecated version automatically upgrade to the next-oldest version. **If you don’t want your cluster to use extended support for a Kubernetes version, you can upgrade it at any time to a version in the standard support window.**

There is opt-out by... upgrading to the supported Kubernetes version :no_mouth:

Reviewer: Lol ! Would be great to also add a link to https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/kubernetes-versions.html#extended-support-faqs in the description so reader can easily confirm.

> conformant for a predictable experience.

Amazon EKS guarantees support for at least four production-ready versions of Kubernetes at any given
time. A Kubernetes version is fully supported on EKS for 14 months as standard support and for up to
26 months as exteneded support after first being available on Amazon EKS. This is true even if

> upstream Kubernetes is no longer supporting a version available on Amazon EKS.

Reviewer: From what I read on https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/amazon-eks-extended-support-for-kubernetes-versions-available-in-preview/, in the paragraph _How does extended support for Kubernetes versions work?_:

- EKS standard version support window matches the upstream Kubernetes support period (14 months from the given Kubernetes version GA).
- Then there is the (up to) 12-months extended support period (extending the window to up to 26 months).

I think we must make this more clear. I did not found the right formulation yet, but will have another look at it later this week.

> time. A Kubernetes version is fully supported on EKS for 14 months as standard support and for up to
> 26 months as exteneded support after first being available on Amazon EKS. This is true even if
> upstream Kubernetes is no longer supporting a version available on Amazon EKS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time. Standard support is provided by Amazon for as long as the upstream Kubernetes release is supported (14 months 
from the Kubernetes GA date). Following the standard support period, Amazon provides extended support for up to 12 months.
```

Suggestion based on https://github.com/endoflife-date/endoflife.date/pull/3675/files#r1369255932.

> You can subscribe to upgrade notices (sent approximately 12 months after the Kubernetes version was
> released on Amazon EKS) on your [Personal Health Dashboard](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/technology/personal-health-dashboard/).
> The notice includes the end of support date, which is at least 60 days from the date of the notice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can subscribe to upgrade notices on your [Personal Health Dashboard](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/technology/personal-health-dashboard/). The notice includes the end of support date, which is at least 60 days from the date of the notice.
```

Because if I understood correctly this is no longer true as the GA date is now the Kubernetes GA date, not the EKS one.

> At the end of the of standard support for a Kubernetes version (starting from version 1.23), Amazon 
> EKS clusters running on EOL version will automatically enter extended support and Amazon apply an 
> additional charge per cluster hour for all clusters running an extended support version. If you 
> don’t want to be [automatically enrolled in extended support](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/kubernetes-versions.html#extended-support-faqs), 
> you can upgrade your cluster to a Kubernetes version that’s in standard Amazon EKS support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from version 1.23, Amazon EKS clusters running on EOL version will automatically enter extended support at the end of the of standard support and Amazon will apply an additional charge per cluster hour for all those clusters.
Users that don’t want to be [automatically enrolled in extended support](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/kubernetes-versions.html#extended-support-faqs) must upgrade their cluster before the end of the standard support phase.
```

A more neutral formulation is preferred here (see https://github.com/endoflife-date/endoflife.date/wiki/Style-Guide#tone-and-text).

Reviewer 2: 👍🏽

## Upgrading

Amazon EKS will automatically upgrade existing control planes (not nodes) to the oldest supported
version through a gradual deployment process after the end of extended support date. After the

> automatic control plane update, you _must [manually update cluster add-ons and Amazon EC2 nodes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html#update-existing-cluster)_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatic control plane update, , users _must [manually update their cluster add-ons and Amazon EC2 nodes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/update-cluster.html#update-existing-cluster)_.
```

It was not your writing, but same thing here regarding the tone:
